README.md, before:

# taxopy

A Python package for obtaining complete lineages and the lowest common ancestor (LCA) from a set of taxonomic identifiers.

## Installation

There are two ways to install taxopy:

  - Using pip:

```
pip install taxopy
```

  - Using conda:

```
conda install -c conda-forge -c bioconda taxopy
```

## Usage

```python
import taxopy
```

First you need to download taxonomic information from NCBI's servers and put this data into a `TaxDb` object:


```python
taxdb = taxopy.TaxDb()
# You can also use your own set of taxonomy files:
taxdb = taxopy.TaxDb(nodes_dmp="taxdb/nodes.dmp", names_dmp="taxdb/names.dmp", keep_files=True)
```

The `TaxDb` object stores the name, rank and parent-child relationships of each taxonomic identifier:


```python
print(taxdb.taxid2name['2'])
print(taxdb.taxid2parent['2'])
print(taxdb.taxid2rank['2'])
```

    Bacteria
    131567
    superkingdom


To get information of a given taxon you can create a `Taxon` object using its taxonomic identifier:


```python
saccharomyces = taxopy.Taxon('4930', taxdb)
human = taxopy.Taxon('9606', taxdb)
gorilla = taxopy.Taxon('9593', taxdb)
lagomorpha = taxopy.Taxon('9975', taxdb)
```

Each `Taxon` object stores a variety of information, such as the rank, identifier and name of the input taxon, and the identifiers and names of all the parent taxa:


```python
print(lagomorpha.rank)
print(lagomorpha.name)
print(lagomorpha.name_lineage)
print(lagomorpha.rank_name_dictionary)
```

    order
    Lagomorpha
    ['Lagomorpha', 'Glires', 'Euarchontoglires', 'Boreoeutheria', 'Eutheria', 'Theria', 'Mammalia', 'Amniota', 'Tetrapoda', 'Dipnotetrapodomorpha', 'Sarcopterygii', 'Euteleostomi', 'Teleostomi', 'Gnathostomata', 'Vertebrata', 'Craniata', 'Chordata', 'Deuterostomia', 'Bilateria', 'Eumetazoa', 'Metazoa', 'Opisthokonta', 'Eukaryota', 'cellular organisms', 'root']
    {'order': 'Lagomorpha', 'clade': 'Opisthokonta', 'superorder': 'Euarchontoglires', 'class': 'Mammalia', 'superclass': 'Sarcopterygii', 'subphylum': 'Craniata', 'phylum': 'Chordata', 'kingdom': 'Metazoa', 'superkingdom': 'Eukaryota'}


You can get the lowest common ancestor of a list of taxa using the `find_lca` function:


```python
human_lagomorpha_lca = taxopy.find_lca([human, lagomorpha], taxdb)
print(human_lagomorpha_lca.name)
```

    Euarchontoglires


You may also use the `find_majority_vote` to discover the most specific taxon that is shared by more than half of the lineages of a list of taxa:


```python
majority_vote = taxopy.find_majority_vote([human, gorilla, lagomorpha], taxdb)
print(majority_vote.name)
```

    Homininae

The `find_majority_vote` function allows you to control its stringency via the `fraction` parameter. For instance, if you would set `fraction` to 0.75 the resulting taxon would be shared by more than 75% of the input lineages. By default, `fraction` is 0.5.

```python
majority_vote = taxopy.find_majority_vote([human, gorilla, lagomorpha], taxdb, fraction=0.75)
print(majority_vote.name)
```

    Euarchontoglires

You can also assign weights to each input lineage:

```python
majority_vote = taxopy.find_majority_vote([saccharomyces, human, gorilla, lagomorpha], taxdb)
weighted_majority_vote = taxopy.find_majority_vote([saccharomyces, human, gorilla, lagomorpha], taxdb, weights=[3, 1, 1, 1])
print(majority_vote.name)
print(weighted_majority_vote.name)
```

    Euarchontoglires
    Opisthokonta

## Acknowledgements

Some of the code used in taxopy was taken from the [CAT/BAT tool for taxonomic classification of contigs and metagenome-assembled genomes](https://github.com/dutilh/CAT).

Commit message:

Add the 'taxid_from_name' function

README.md, after:

# taxopy

A Python package for obtaining complete lineages and the lowest common ancestor (LCA) from a set of taxonomic identifiers.

## Installation

There are two ways to install taxopy:

  - Using pip:

```
pip install taxopy
```

  - Using conda:

```
conda install -c conda-forge -c bioconda taxopy
```

## Usage

```python
import taxopy
```

First you need to download taxonomic information from NCBI's servers and put this data into a `TaxDb` object:


```python
taxdb = taxopy.TaxDb()
# You can also use your own set of taxonomy files:
taxdb = taxopy.TaxDb(nodes_dmp="taxdb/nodes.dmp", names_dmp="taxdb/names.dmp", keep_files=True)
```

The `TaxDb` object stores the name, rank and parent-child relationships of each taxonomic identifier:


```python
print(taxdb.taxid2name['2'])
print(taxdb.taxid2parent['2'])
print(taxdb.taxid2rank['2'])
```

    Bacteria
    131567
    superkingdom


To get information of a given taxon you can create a `Taxon` object using its taxonomic identifier:


```python
saccharomyces = taxopy.Taxon('4930', taxdb)
human = taxopy.Taxon('9606', taxdb)
gorilla = taxopy.Taxon('9593', taxdb)
lagomorpha = taxopy.Taxon('9975', taxdb)
```

Each `Taxon` object stores a variety of information, such as the rank, identifier and name of the input taxon, and the identifiers and names of all the parent taxa:


```python
print(lagomorpha.rank)
print(lagomorpha.name)
print(lagomorpha.name_lineage)
print(lagomorpha.rank_name_dictionary)
```

    order
    Lagomorpha
    ['Lagomorpha', 'Glires', 'Euarchontoglires', 'Boreoeutheria', 'Eutheria', 'Theria', 'Mammalia', 'Amniota', 'Tetrapoda', 'Dipnotetrapodomorpha', 'Sarcopterygii', 'Euteleostomi', 'Teleostomi', 'Gnathostomata', 'Vertebrata', 'Craniata', 'Chordata', 'Deuterostomia', 'Bilateria', 'Eumetazoa', 'Metazoa', 'Opisthokonta', 'Eukaryota', 'cellular organisms', 'root']
    {'order': 'Lagomorpha', 'clade': 'Opisthokonta', 'superorder': 'Euarchontoglires', 'class': 'Mammalia', 'superclass': 'Sarcopterygii', 'subphylum': 'Craniata', 'phylum': 'Chordata', 'kingdom': 'Metazoa', 'superkingdom': 'Eukaryota'}

### LCA and majority vote

You can get the lowest common ancestor of a list of taxa using the `find_lca` function:


```python
human_lagomorpha_lca = taxopy.find_lca([human, lagomorpha], taxdb)
print(human_lagomorpha_lca.name)
```

    Euarchontoglires


You may also use the `find_majority_vote` to discover the most specific taxon that is shared by more than half of the lineages of a list of taxa:


```python
majority_vote = taxopy.find_majority_vote([human, gorilla, lagomorpha], taxdb)
print(majority_vote.name)
```

    Homininae

The `find_majority_vote` function allows you to control its stringency via the `fraction` parameter. For instance, if you would set `fraction` to 0.75 the resulting taxon would be shared by more than 75% of the input lineages. By default, `fraction` is 0.5.

```python
majority_vote = taxopy.find_majority_vote([human, gorilla, lagomorpha], taxdb, fraction=0.75)
print(majority_vote.name)
```

    Euarchontoglires

You can also assign weights to each input lineage:

```python
majority_vote = taxopy.find_majority_vote([saccharomyces, human, gorilla, lagomorpha], taxdb)
weighted_majority_vote = taxopy.find_majority_vote([saccharomyces, human, gorilla, lagomorpha], taxdb, weights=[3, 1, 1, 1])
print(majority_vote.name)
print(weighted_majority_vote.name)
```

    Euarchontoglires
    Opisthokonta

### Taxid from name

If you only have the name of a taxon, you can get its corresponding taxid using the `taxid_from_name` function:

```python
taxid = taxopy.taxid_from_name('Homininae', taxdb)
print(taxid)
```

    ['207598']

This function returns a list of all taxonomic identifiers associated with the input name. In the case of homonyms, the list will contain multiple taxonomic identifiers:

```python
taxid = taxopy.taxid_from_name('Aotus', taxdb)
print(taxid)
```

    ['9504', '114498']

## Acknowledgements

Some of the code used in taxopy was taken from the [CAT/BAT tool for taxonomic classification of contigs and metagenome-assembled genomes](https://github.com/dutilh/CAT).
